Add Blog Post for Volume Populator GA (#49542)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-04-17-volume-populators-ga/index.md

* PopulateCleanupFn(): Cleans up temporary resources created by the provider-specific functions after data population is completed

### Flexible metric handling for providers

Our beta phase highlighted a new requirement: the need to aggregate metrics not just from lib-volume-populator, but also from other components within the provider's codebase.

To address this, we've introduced a provider metric manager. This enhancement delegates the implementation of metrics logic to the provider itself, rather than relying solely on lib-volume-populator. This shift provides greater flexibility and control over metrics collection and aggregation, enabling a more comprehensive view of provider performance.

### Clean up temp resources

During the beta phase, the volume populator couldn't handle PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) deletions that occurred while volume population was in progress due to limitations in finalizer handling. To ensure a smooth transition to GA, we've enhanced the populator to support the deletion of temporary resources if the original PVC is deleted. This prevents resource leaks and ensures a more robust and reliable system.

## How to use it

> To try it out, please follow the [steps](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/05/16/volume-populators-beta/#trying-it-out) in the previous beta blog.

Reviewer: We prefer use of site-relative links where feasible.

```suggestion
To try it out, please follow the [steps](/blog/2022/05/16/volume-populators-beta/#trying-it-out) in the previous beta blog.
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.33: Volume Populators Graduate to GA"
date: 2025-04-17
slug: volume-populators-ga
author: >
  Danna Wang (Google)
  Sunny Song (Google)
---

The volume populators feature is now entering GA! The `AnyVolumeDataSource` feature
gate defaults to enabled in Kubernetes v1.33, which means that users can specify any custom resource
as the data source of a PVC.

## What is new

There are three major enhancements from beta.

### Populator Pod is optional

> During the beta phase, we discovered that initiating data population doesn't always require a dedicated populator pod. In some cases, it's more efficient to interact with the cloud provider's APIs directly from the controller pod.

Reviewer 2: Other than Cloud Providers, there could be other storage or backup vendors or other applications that may want to integrate with Volume Populators.

To accommodate this, we've introduced three new plugin-based functions:
* PopulateFn(): Executes the provider-specific data population logic.
* PopulateCompleteFn(): Checks if the data population operation has finished successfully.

> * PopulateCleanupFn(): Cleans up temporary resources created by the provider-specific functions after data population is completed

Reviewer 2: Are there any documentations on how to implement these plugin functions?  Maybe in the CSI docs https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/docs?  Are these functions required for other applications to integrate with VolumePopulators?

Author: We added an example here in this PR: https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/lib-volume-populator/pull/208

Reviewer 2: I know that the PR is not merged yet. Can you add that an example will be provided and add a link to https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/lib-volume-populator/tree/master/example?

Reviewer 3: I see that https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/lib-volume-populator/pull/208 has merged.

### Mutator functions to modify the Kubernetes resources

> For GA a MutatorConfig to the Volume Populator Controller is added, allowing the specification of mutator functions to modify Kubernetes resources. This enables customization of the default Kubernetes objects in the volume populator.

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate why mutation is needed?  What's the use case?

Author: The PVC object only has:
```
dataSourceRef:
    apiGroup: provider.example.com
    kind: Provider
    name: provider1
```
as extra. But in the actual volume populator you can set provisioner as part of MutatorConfig.

Reviewer 2: Sure.  Add this to the blog to clarify?

Author: added to the diff here: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/49542/commits/936e2a33ae11aea28ed267b2122f9391e78a1061

### Flexible metric handling for providers

Our beta phase highlighted a new requirement: the need to aggregate metrics not just from lib-volume-populator, but also from other components within the provider's codebase.

> To address this, we've introduced a provider metric manager. This enhancement delegates the implementation of metrics logic to the provider itself, rather than relying solely on lib-volume-populator. This shift provides greater flexibility and control over metrics collection and aggregation, enabling a more comprehensive view of provider performance.

Reviewer 2: For an application to integrate with Volume Populators, what does it need to do to support this?

Author: There is no extra work you need to do, it is built in with lib-volume-populator.

Reviewer 2: Can you add a hyper link to the provider metric manager?

### Clean up temp resources

> During the beta phase, the volume populator couldn't handle PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) deletions that occurred while volume population was in progress due to limitations in finalizer handling. To ensure a smooth transition to GA, we've enhanced the populator to support the deletion of temporary resources if the original PVC is deleted. This prevents resource leaks and ensures a more robust and reliable system.

Reviewer 2: What are the temporary resources?

Author: Anything created by the lib-volume-populator like pvc prime is temp resources.

Author: I added as "support the deletion of temporary resources(PVC primet etc.)" to make it clear.

## How to use it

To try it out, please follow the [steps](/blog/2022/05/16/volume-populators-beta/#trying-it-out) in the previous beta blog.

## Future Feature Requests

For next step, there are several potential feature requests for volume populator:

* Multi sync: it is a one direction sync from source defined to the destination. But it will happen multiple times, either by an internal(like a periodically cron job) or a one time trigger by the user
* Bidirectional sync: an extension of multi sync but make it bidirectional for between source destination
* Populate data with priorities: with a list of different dataSourceRef, populate based on priorities
* Populate data from multiple sources of the same provider: populate multiple different sources to one destination
* Populate data from multiple sources of the different providers: populate multiple different sources to one destination, pipelining different resources’ population

> To ensure we're building something truly valuable, we'd love to hear about any specific use cases you have in mind for this feature. For any inquiries or specific questions related to volume populator, please reach out to the [SIG Storage community Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T09NY5SBT/C09QZFCE5).

Reviewer 2: Not everyone reading the blog has already joined the slack. Can you add the SIG Storage community page https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage?

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.33: Volume Populators Graduate to GA"

> date: 2025-04-17

Reviewer 2: This date will be changed to the assigned blog publication date when that's available.

> date: 2025-04-17

Reviewer 4: Very small nit based on @rytswd's comment [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/49967#discussion_r2045821825). Ryota can correct me if I'm wrong - if this is needed or if the comms team will take care of this!

```suggestion
date: 2025-04-23
```

> date: 2025-04-17

Reviewer 5: Thanks! This is actually fine either way, because the `draft: true` front matter will keep the blog unpublished. Once the PR is merged, the release team can make a simple PR to update the date, and also remove the draft flag.
I suppose it is better to be safe, however, and having some future date may be desirable indeed (and even something like 2025-12-31)

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.33: Volume Populators Graduate to GA"
date: 2025-06-23
draft: true

> slug: volume-populators-ga

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
slug: kubernetes-v1-33-volume-populators-ga
```

author: >
  Danna Wang (Google)
  Sunny Song (Google)
---

> The volume populators feature is now entering GA! The `AnyVolumeDataSource` feature

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes _volume populators_ are now  generally available (GA)! The `AnyVolumeDataSource` feature
```

> gate defaults to enabled in Kubernetes v1.33, which means that users can specify any custom resource

Reviewer 3: So, I'd write it like this:
```suggestion
gate is treated as always enabled for Kubernetes v1.33, which means that users can specify any appropriate [custom resource](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/#custom-resources)
```

> as the data source of a PVC.

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
as the data source of a PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC).
```

An example of how to use dataSourceRef in PVC:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: pvc1
spec:
  ...
  dataSourceRef:
    apiGroup: provider.example.com
    kind: Provider
    name: provider1
```

## What is new

There are four major enhancements from beta.

### Populator Pod is optional

During the beta phase, we discovered that initiating data population doesn't always require a dedicated populator pod. In some cases, it's more efficient to interact with the provider's APIs directly from the controller pod.

To accommodate this, we've introduced three new plugin-based functions:
* PopulateFn(): Executes the provider-specific data population logic.
* PopulateCompleteFn(): Checks if the data population operation has finished successfully.

> * PopulateCleanupFn(): Cleans up temporary resources created by the provider-specific functions after data population is completed

Reviewer 3: nit: write the function names inside backticks

A provider example is added in [lib-volume-populator/example](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/lib-volume-populator/tree/master/example).

### Mutator functions to modify the Kubernetes resources

> For GA a MutatorConfig to the Volume Populator Controller is added, allowing the specification of mutator functions to modify Kubernetes resources. For example, if the PVC prime is not an exact copy of the PVC and you need provider-specific information for the driver, you can include this information in the optional MutatorConfig. This allows you to customize the default Kubernetes objects in the volume populator.

Reviewer 3: Is this technically accurate?
```suggestion
For GA, the Kubernetes project updated the the example volume populator controller
(part of the container storage interface implementation for Kubernetes).
As a storage driver author, you can now specify _mutator functions_ that modify storage resources.
For example, if the PVC prime is not an exact copy of the PVC and you need provider-specific information for the driver, you can include this information in the optional `MutatorConfig`.
This allows you to customize the Kubernetes objects in the volume populator, away from
the defaults that would otherwise be written.
```

Author: Updated the text with some modifications. Please take a look again.

### Flexible metric handling for providers

Our beta phase highlighted a new requirement: the need to aggregate metrics not just from lib-volume-populator, but also from other components within the provider's codebase.

> To address this, we've introduced a [provider metric manager](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/lib-volume-populator/blob/8a922a5302fdba13a6c27328ee50e5396940214b/populator-machinery/controller.go#L122). This enhancement delegates the implementation of metrics logic to the provider itself, rather than relying solely on lib-volume-populator. This shift provides greater flexibility and control over metrics collection and aggregation, enabling a more comprehensive view of provider performance.

Reviewer 3: Not sure if you mean "we" as Danna Wang and Sunny Song, or as Google. If neither, try:
```suggestion
To address this, SIG Storage introduced a [provider metric manager](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/lib-volume-populator/blob/8a922a5302fdba13a6c27328ee50e5396940214b/populator-machinery/controller.go#L122).
This enhancement delegates the implementation of metrics logic to the provider itself, rather than relying solely on lib-volume-populator.
This shift provides greater flexibility and control over metrics collection and aggregation, enabling a more comprehensive view of provider performance.
```

> ### Clean up temp resources

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
### Clean up for temporary resources
```

> During the beta phase, we identified potential resource leaks with PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) deletion while volume population was in progress, due to limitations in finalizer handling. We have improved the populator to support the deletion of temporary resources (PVC prime, etc.) if the original PVC is deleted in this GA release.

Reviewer 3: I think the populator is out-of-tree (and therefore someone could substitute a compatible implementation). If so:
```suggestion
During the beta phase, contributors to Kubernetes identified potential resource leaks with PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) deletion while volume population was in progress; these leaks happened due to limitations in finalizer handling.
Ahead of the graduation to general availability, the Kubernetes project improved the example populator code to support the deletion of temporary resources (PVC prime, etc.) if the original PVC is deleted.
```

Author: There is improvement of example populator but only the populator itself?

> During the beta phase, the volume populator couldn't handle PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) deletions that occurred while volume population was in progress due to limitations in finalizer handling. To ensure a smooth transition to GA, we've enhanced the populator to support the deletion of temporary resources(PVC primet etc.) if the original PVC is deleted. This prevents resource leaks and ensures a more robust and reliable system.

Reviewer 5: Here is just a minor typo fix

```suggestion
During the beta phase, the volume populator couldn't handle PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) deletions that occurred while volume population was in progress due to limitations in finalizer handling. To ensure a smooth transition to GA, we've enhanced the populator to support the deletion of temporary resources (PVC prime, etc.) if the original PVC is deleted. This prevents resource leaks and ensures a more robust and reliable system.
```

But I'm not sure about the wording here.
- You mentioned "To ensure a smooth transition to GA, ...", but this isn't about the transition to GA per se, but overall stability of PVC handling IIUC?

I might suggest a bit more drastic update of something like below:

```suggestion
During the beta phase, we identified potential resource leaks with PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) deletion while volume population was in progress, due to limitations in finalizer handling. We have improved the populator to support the deletion of temporary resources (PVC prime, etc.) if the original PVC is deleted in this GA release.
```

Author: For GA, major issues need to be addressed. This resource leak was mentioned as an issue.

## How to use it

> To try it out, please follow the [steps](/blog/2022/05/16/volume-populators-beta/#trying-it-out) in the previous beta blog.

Reviewer 3: nit: we should link to the documentation (eg a tutorial) rather than to previous announcements.

Author: There is no documentation other than the KEP link? It seems only announcements.

> ## Future feature requests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Future directions and potential feature requests
```

> ## Future Feature Requests

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Future feature requests
```

For next step, there are several potential feature requests for volume populator:

> * Multi sync: the current implementation is a one-time unidirectional sync from source to destination. This can be extended to support multiple syncs, which opens up an opportunity to run periodic sync, or allow users to sync on demand

Reviewer 5: Sorry really minor one but noticed a grammar error

```suggestion
* Multi sync: the current implementation is a one-time unidirectional sync from source to destination. This can be extended to support multiple syncs, enabling periodic syncs or allowing users to sync on demand
```

Author: Updated

> * Multi sync: it is a one direction sync from source defined to the destination. But it will happen multiple times, either by an internal(like a periodically cron job) or a one time trigger by the user

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure what this was actually meant to be... Do you mean that it currently supports one time sync operation, but we could support more periodic sync operations in future?

Author: Yes, right now it only populates once.

Reviewer 5: Thanks for the clarification! This only mentions one direction sync right now, rather than one-time sync (it seems to be mixed up with bidirectional sync). I think this could be updated something like "the current implementation of one-time sync can be extended to support multiple sync with periodic updates, or force sync upon user request"?

Author: mutisync means one direction, multiple times syncing. One time sync is included in GA. This is for "Future feature requests"

Reviewer 5: Indeed, because this is for the future possibility, you may want to articulate how that would look like compared to functionality today?

Reviewer 5: The wording right now does not describe what we currently have, and how it can be extended (at least from the multi-sync standpoint -- as I mentioned, this seems to be talking about the bidirectional sync instead)

Reviewer 5: The problem I see is with "one direction sync", which is not about "one-time sync" but rather unidirectional sync. Also, the mention of cron job is a bit strange to me, whereas I can understand periodic sync (which can be in any way of form including cron or other alternatives), and user triggered sync to take place. Some grammatical issues need to be addressed as well.

I would suggest the following if we were to keep the original sentence structure:

```suggestion
* Multi sync: the current implementation is a one-time unidirectional sync from source to destination. This can be extended to support multiple syncs, which opens up an opportunity to run periodic sync, or allow users to sync on demand
```

Author: Updated :)

> * Bidirectional sync: an extension of multi sync but make it bidirectional for between source destination

Reviewer 5: A slight wording update that could help clarify?

```suggestion
* Bidirectional sync: an extension of multi sync above, but making it bidirectional between source and destination
```

* Populate data with priorities: with a list of different dataSourceRef, populate based on priorities
* Populate data from multiple sources of the same provider: populate multiple different sources to one destination
* Populate data from multiple sources of the different providers: populate multiple different sources to one destination, pipelining different resources’ population

> To ensure we're building something truly valuable, we'd love to hear about any specific use cases you have in mind for this feature. For any inquiries or specific questions related to volume populator, please reach out to the [SIG Storage community](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To ensure we're building something truly valuable, Kubernetes SIG Storage would love to hear about any specific use cases you have in mind for this feature.
For any inquiries or specific questions related to volume populator, please reach out to the [SIG Storage community](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage).
```
